Over lunch, this individual told me, you
know, every founder and every VC in
China studies the West at a nauseating
level. So they listen to all the
podcasts, they read everything they
possibly can, they study any speech,
they look at the financials. And he
said, "The West doesn't do that of
China."
And you know, maybe we should be maybe
we should be studying the best and the
brightest over there.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hey, Bill. Great to see you.
>> Good to see you.
>> Summer's summer has just blown past.
It's It's almost football season.
>> Yes.
>> How are the Longhorns looking this year?
Um, they're ranked pretty high.
>> What's that mean? Come on, give me the
scoop. I know. I know. You're all
>> people that people that know, but they
they have the dangerous starting
position of being ranked number one in
the country.
>> Oh, wow. Wow. Any big games coming up?
>> They uh play the number two team in the
country this Saturday. And
>> so, we're going to find out. We're going
to find out. We're gonna find out. Oh,
back to Buckeye country.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> It's been really incredible. uh you know
I just I just got back to Silicon Valley
um after you know being away for a few
weeks these you know the OpenAI deal the
anthropic deal I was just looking at
these I think these are bigger private
IPOs than any public IPO uh done in the
last 5 years in the tech market right
you had Sam say the other day Sam Alman
say you know two two things can be
simultaneously true um one that this is
the biggest thing to ever happened in
technology But number two, uh, that in
the short run things become overheated
and people are can get a little bit
ahead of themselves. Where are you on
that? Look, there's just no denying that
the amount of capital that is going into
these companies earlier in their life
and the scale of hiring and their
willingness to take on risk, which I
think you can use cash burn as just a
proxy for risk because you get further
away from knowing unit economics and and
you're more threatening. you know, I I
think what those numbers are
unprecedented. Like even against, you
know, the Uber Door Dash wars and all
this, they're bigger than that. And so I
think it's part of we've talked about
it. I think it's part of a systematic
trend where investors are aware of
network effects. They they've watched
companies that get the initial
conditions right go on to really big
outcomes and they're willing to bet
ahead of the curve. And as the more
confident they get over more time, the
more they're willing to make that bet
ahead of time and um and so, you know,
it is what it is. We're seeing, you
know, massive numbers.
>> Well, I'd say it's it's a combination of
two things. Extraordinary scaling. We've
never seen two companies, in the case of
OpenAI, scale uh users and scale revenue
as fast as they are. But definitely,
you're absolutely right. The private
markets are there to meet them. Um, and
we're seeing the depth and the breadth
of capital and investment in the private
markets, I think, unlike anything we've
ever seen. But, you know, we're we're
going to save that for
>> Yeah, save it for Let's save it. I We
>> We're going to save Let's save that for
another day. We're going to do something
a little different today. Um, you know,
one topic that I think um we we've hit
on time and time again, but we're going
to we're really just try to dedicate the
show to it today, and that's China. You
know, you just got back from China. It's
one of the hottest in many ways most
consequential and also most
controversial debates I think in Silicon
Valley and in Washington. You know on
the one hand you have I think national
security economic hawks you know who who
are in this camp that we should
decouple. It's a little bit more cold
war 2.0 a great power struggle. This is
the mirrorshimer perspective. You know,
maybe in the middle you have, you know,
tech pragmatists, I guess I I might call
them, you know, like Jensen Hang or Tim
Cook. I'd probably put myself in this
camp who thinks we we have to compete.
We have to re onshore industry. You
probably should have some tariffs in
order to achieve that. But you you
definitely can't decouple or ignore or
or antagonize. And then maybe on the
other end, you have kind of the
globalist. I don't know, Jeff Sachs.
Jeffrey Sachs is probably in this camp.
It's free trade, open science,
collaboration.
And you know, there's this is of
tremendous consequence to issues around
tariffs and trade, issues around
military, issues around AI. And there's
this new book out by Dan Wang that I
want to talk about um you know uh where
where he really takes on the differences
between the two countries. But why don't
we start with you know this trip that
you recently took. You know, you you
just got back from China. Why did why
did you go you know and frankly
especially given all the you know
blowback you've gotten personally
benchmarks gotten uh with respect to
China maybe for having too soft of view
on China. Give me your inspiration for
wanting to go and spend as much time as
you did studying China.
>> Yeah. So I've I've probably been four or
five times before this trip but I hadn't
been since um co and I've been reading
you know about everyone that's been
going. We had talked about Thomas
Freriedman's comments um from his last
trip and you hear about all the things
that are different. Um, you know,
personally, my my daughter's an Asian
studies major, so she went on the trip
with with myself and my wife, and so,
you know, with her studying that topic,
this is I thought it'd be a great chance
for her to see things, too. Um, much
younger than us, but I wanted her to go
around and the fact that she speaks
Mandarin and was helpful on on the trip
as well. But you, you know, you just
said something, right? you said this is
probably the most consequential, you
know, other nation when it comes to
thinking about America or thinking about
our stock markets or thinking about how
technology companies are evolving. And
so I just wanted to learn like like like
why wouldn't you want to know more? I
don't understand how you if it is the
most consequential relationship for our
country, why you'd want to know less,
right? And so, um, I've always enjoyed
going over there. I've always en enjoyed
learning things that I don't know. Um,
and I really wanted to see it up close
and personal. Um, one thing that was
super helpful was Dan Wang, who you just
mentioned gave me a early copy of his
book, so I read it on the way over
there.
>> Tell us who tell us a little bit who is
Dan Wang.
>> So, um, it's a gentleman that lived over
there. He lived over there during COVID.
um you know he's a he's a policy analyst
um and he recently moved back to the US
um
>> he's at the Hoover Institute been
studying China for a long time looks at
it through the lens of technology and
innovation
>> and the book's titled breakneck and it's
really talking about some of the
acceleration
um that we've seen in in building you
know inside of China but but it it I
would suggest the two things about the
book that are really interesting one he
kind of uses Is it a mirror back on the
US? So, it's really about both
countries. It's not just about China.
Um, and then two, he's balanced like he
talks about the pros, you know, and the
cons of what have happened over there.
He starts with with this chapter that
was recently republished in the Atlantic
where he highlights that the vast
majority of the polit are former
engineers. So this is the the ruling
party within China and that the vast
majority of the people in Washington DC
are former lawyers and you know the he
uses that lens to say this is why
they're great at building things and
maybe why they're not so great at social
things. I think he gives the edge to
having the lawyers to protecting free
speech and personal rights. He did not
enjoy the lockdown in Shanghai which was
fairly abrupt. um he's very negative on
the one child policy and for those
people that don't know the the Chinese
government's now trying to encourage
people to have three children not
successfully but but that's the new
program um so they've completely flipped
from where they were um but but it's a
fascinating read it's a very personal
read you can tell that you know his life
journey his parents were born there and
left you know and went to Canada and
that's how he grew up in the west and
then he went back and so he has it's I
think it's a really interesting lens but
it's very very current. One of the
things he really dives into and this is
something that that people that I talked
to that know China have known this for
some time but I don't think the general
people understand this. So one of the
things that's led to the vast buildout
so we've read about high-speed trains
we've read about overnight cities we've
read about their number of companies in
the solar space and the EV space. One of
the reasons that happens is the
provincial leaders compete with each
other. So the provinces are very
competitive with one another. Not in the
same way the states are really. Um, one
of the reasons this is true is if you
run a province and do well, you put
yourself in really good standings to
move up in the federal government. But
wouldn't you say that's a I mean that
seems to me like Gavin Newsome competing
you know with Dantis in Florida on you
know who is more business friendly who
is tougher on immigration. It seems a
little bit the same way.
>> I think it's a little bit the same way
but the difference is that because
there's a singular government that's
going to make choices like like in the
US if you do well as a governor you
might get elected. But in this case,
it's more like divisions of a company
and if you run one well, you might get
the CEO job and and so that competition,
you know, leads to overbuild in certain
cases. So there's several ghost cities
um that that are buildings that are
empty, you know, where they've built too
fast, are now facing problems even
though they're the world leader in EVs
and the world leader in solar panels
where some of these companies need to go
bankrupt and a province may not want
them to because of employment issues,
right? And so those are th those are
flip, you know, two sides of a coin. You
get one benefit, you get hyper
competition. We talked about the
thousand flowers bloom. So this the the
federal government publishes every five
years this this mandate of the things
these are the things that are important
and you need to go work on and then the
provinces you know go go at it like they
go right against those initiatives and
that's that's how they've got taken a
lead in those things we mentioned and
energy production right you wonder we
talk about all the number of nuclear
plants that they have new nuclear starts
solar farms wind farms
>> I want to dig into that
I think there's this general view that
China's good at building things,
building iPhones, but perhaps not at
innovating, right? And then, you know,
Jensen Hang reminded us recently that
50% of the world's AI researchers are in
China and they're indeed innovating and
not copying. You know, on the ground,
when you look at the things happening in
auto, when you look at the things
happening in AI, when you look at that
things happening in space or energy,
etc. Um, how would you compare contrast
as a venture capitalist the level of
rigor and innovation and excitement,
enthusiasm,
um, and investment, I guess, going on
against these, you know, critical future
industries.
>> Well, if you're over there, you you know
that the bite dance founder is just
remarkably unique. You know, Le Jun at
Xiaomi is remarkably unique. And if you
spend time um studying those people, I
just I don't know how you would possibly
think that they can't innovate. I mean,
t Tik Tok was there first, right? And
then it came here and then reals copied
Tik Tok. One thing that doesn't seem
like innovation, but I was surprised by
PopMart is a uh 4050 billion dollar
public company, which is a children's
toy company that started in China and is
everywhere over there. But like just the
idea that that there is no innovation.
You know, one one of my favorite
meetings and I promised I would protect
the innocent. So I'm not going to sure
who it was with, but over lunch this
individual told me, you know, every
founder and every VC in China studies
the West at a nauseating level. So they
listen to all the podcasts, they read
everything they possibly can, they study
any speech, they look at the financials.
And he said the West doesn't do that of
China.
And you know, maybe this goes back to my
main motivation for going over there to
learn, but that I thought that was a
very provocative statement that he made,
you know, and um maybe we should be
maybe we should be studying the best and
the brightest over there. Well, let's
let's dive into, you know, maybe one
industry, I I guess, as a lens. Yeah. I
know you spent a bunch of time uh in the
auto industry. Yeah. Right. Looking at
all of these new entrance and I help us
understand the innovation that's
happening there on two dimensions. One
on uh you know just electric vehicles.
number two on you know maybe autonomy
and then number three I'm just curious
like how Tesla is able to compete so
effectively you know in a market where
you have this hyper competition uh for
electric vehicles.
>> Yeah. So I I I had a number of auto
experiences when I was over there. First
of all I I was invited to um visit BYD.
This is my they gave me a nice coat. I
um I met with Stella Lee who is their
number one executive I think facing
outside of China. Um she runs all their
Europe initiatives. For those people
that don't know BYD is the largest EV
manufacturer in the world at about 4
million vehicles. Um they started in
batteries. They they you know they
compete in with uh Fox Con to build
mobile phones. They bought Jable
Circuit. You remember that old company?
>> I do.
>> And they make lots of things. They make
buses and subways and all kinds of
different things, but they got into cars
uh over I don't know about 5 to 10 years
ago. Um they have a number of models.
They gave me this one. This is, you
know, a a very kind of high-end sports
car. In fact, I met a public company CEO
that was proudly showing me this was his
favorite car that he drives around. They
make an SUV you can drive into the
water. I don't I don't know exactly why
you'd want to do that, but we rode it
into the water, drove around in the
water, and drove out. Um, they have cars
at 10 to 15 grand price point on the
entry side. They've hired a European
designer, which is how they're building
stuff like this. Um, on the higher end,
um, and, um, they're very aggressive
from a cost perspective. I think BYD
more than anyone on the cost side. It's
not preventing them from building
higherend cars as well. Um, so that's
BYD. I also had a chance it to visit
Xiaoi. They also gave me a car. The uh
the Xiai is a super interesting story if
people don't know. So I I was fortunate
enough to meet Lejun back in 0304. Um
but about 13 10 to 13 years ago he
started a phone company and that's what
Xiai is and that company's now third I
think around the globe in handsets sold
heavy in Europe heavy in South America
not just China um and 3 to four years
ago I think around 2021 he decided to
build a car and it was about the same
time Apple said they were going to build
a car and and mind you this guy was back
in 03 ran an e-commerce company called
Joy-Yo. Like like he's he wasn't I
there's no reason he should be able to
build a phone and then build a car.
>> So what do you attribute that to Bill?
like why you know when you see that you
know again going back to Dan Wang's book
he's like this is an engineering culture
that has built these technological
ecosystems that gives rise to a higher
velocity of innovation uh you know than
we see in the United States that Dan
would argue is bogged down by you know
regulatory capture and lawyers etc. Why
do you think uh you know Xiai is so
successful?
>> And by the way let me let me just share
with you some numbers. So, so they're
making uh a thousand of these a day.
They just came out with a kind of a
Cayenne
>> thousand cars a day.
>> Yeah. In in this in the factory that I
went to, um it it it they're sold out.
They have like a 30 to 40 week backlog.
Um you have to pay five grand to get on
the waiting list. The factory, this is
an interesting data point, the factory
makes a thousand cars a day with 2,000
employees. Um, it was highly automated,
like really highly automated. I imagine
that they plan to improve that number
over the next 5 years. Let's say they
took it to a,000 employees for a
thousand cars. That'd be a employee per
car per day. That number is like at six
in the US. And that's super interesting
for a number of things. It's like if you
want to bring the jobs back there by the
time you get the jobs back there may not
be any jobs like like at one
>> because of automation
>> the entire global you know potential for
car manufacturing in 5 to 10 years from
now could be like 400k total and so you
know we we need we just need to be
really thoughtful about those things but
but but back to Leune he gave a talk in
2024 we're talking about maybe people
should be watching and learning in both
directions that I would encourage people
to watch. It's on YouTube. It's his
State of the Union from 2024. And he
spends about an hour talking about his
approach to building a car. And it
sounded like so ridiculously I don't
like like you ask about entrepreneurial.
He he he decided that he hadn't been
driving a car for 10 years because he
had had a driver. So, he immediately
switched seats with his driver and then
he um he went through the parking lot at
his company and if there was ever a car
he had not driven, he'd leave a note on
it and ask to borrow it and then he
would have the uh the owner of the car
tell them what they liked and didn't
like. So, he claimed he drove 170 cars
that way. Um
>> and then he also like BYD, they hired a
European designer um that came in and
helped him out. But for an entrepreneur
who had never been in the car business
to build a factory in a three-year
window and and look, same thing was
true. Our friend Omid built a factory in
Texas, you know, you know, under 40.
Like just spectacular that that these
entrepreneurs are capable of doing these
things. But it just kind of blows my
mind like when I was being driven in
this golf cart through this factory just
thinking that this person wasn't in the
business three or four years ago. And
for for people that don't know, I'd
encourage you to go online and and so uh
the CEO of Ford Farley, he went over
there and I think had the exact same
tour I did and he insisted they ship him
one back to Chicago and he's been
driving it around and he's made some ex
pretty extreme statements um after
having experienced John. This car sells
for about 40k. Um but he said it's the
most humbling thing I've ever seen. And
he says even beyond that their cost
their quality of vehicles is far
superior to what I see in the west. We
are in a global competition with China
and it's not just EVs. If we do not if
if we lose this we do not have a future
at Ford. you know that that's farly at
Ford, you know, and and I by the way, I
would take a pause after mentioning that
to the people that are going to um
accuse just because I went over there to
learn accuse me of somehow being like a
a an agent for the CCP. Is that also
true of the CEO of Ford? You know, like
why is he saying these things? Like
we're just witnessing what's happening
on the ground. One of my observations
is, and you hear this from Elon, you
hear this from Jensen Huang, you hear
this from Tim Cook, you hear it from
Farley, it's extreme respect for the for
the level of innovation, um, for the
focus, for the engineering culture that
exists in China. And that to me, one of
the reasons I wanted to do this pod on
China is because I think it's as much a
reflection about what the United States
needs to do to re-engineer its own
society, right? It's not enough to say
that we want to reonshore critical
manufacturing. It really is about, you
know, this movement around American
exceptionalism, America builds. It's
about making the reforms necessary
whether it's regulatory capture whether
it's the you know tort reform legal
reform required to frankly allow uh uh
you know this level of innovation and
recognize that we're in this global
competition you know and there are two
ways in which you can you can approach
this bill one is we can build barriers
we can try to decouple and we can
pretend the rest of the world somehow
won't buy China's goods You know, but if
you look at it today, the US only
represents about 14% of China's exports.
The US only represents about 3% of
China's GDP.
>> Yep.
>> Right. So, like we're just not that
important to China. I I don't want to
understate like, you know, we're still
very significant, but China has found a
market in Europe. They found a market in
Africa. They found a market in South
America, right? And it it seems to me
that the harder pill for the US to
swallow and this is where I think that
you know I I I'm in the camp of of those
in the middle who say we need to engage.
We need to compete. There is a
competition. We want to win the
competition. But this is about focusing
on us and winning and running a faster
race. We have a lot of reforms. I think
a lot are occurring now. I think we're
doing the type of things that we need to
be doing um in order to get more
globally competitive. There are
industries that are critical to our
national security um you know things
like rare earth magnets, things like uh
you know steel productions, things like
pharmaceuticals where I think it is
appropriate to have both an industrial
policy and a tariff policy that's going
to provide the incentives to those
industries. Um, but it it's, you know,
to me, you know, the reflection on what
I hear you saying about China when I
read Dan's book is that China is putting
the accelerator to the floor in terms of
innovation and it's in every single
industry. It's powered by, you know, the
this provincial competition you talked
about. It's powered by people who are
just, you know, naturally
entrepreneurial and hardworking. Um, and
there's no escaping that and there's no
putting that genie back in the box.
Would you What are your thoughts on
that?
>> Yeah. No, I think it's exactly right. I
mean, BYD has um a big presence in
Hungary and they have a fac they're
building a factory in or already have
one in Mexico. And why, if you're
Mexico, would you not buy the 10 to 20
grand EV? Why would you buy the 50 grand
one from America? It just doesn't make
any sense, right? like you're if for any
country around the world and I could
reflect this on the US as well if you're
not going to buy you know domestically
you you should certainly buy from the
lowcost producer right it goes back to
to comparative advantage right if you if
you can't produce a globally competitive
product and you close your import border
your people are forced to buy a product
that that is overpriced and and and not
and and so from a from a standard of
living perspective, they're worse off
than they would be if you had opened the
import door. And so I don't you know, I
I'll give you another example of this.
So this is the the BYD. This is the
Apollo um competitor to Whimo. So we
we've we've seen the Whimos around
Austin and San Francisco. We've ridden
in them. This is I've ridden in this
now. Um, it's a little bigger, I think,
a little roomier than than than the
Jaguar for sure. Um, it's more of an
SUV. Um, but this is on the streets, you
know, and Apollo is kind of interesting.
It's inside of BYU, which is a search
engine company. Um, while people are
simultaneous, while people are saying
that that that Whimos should be worth
170 billion inside of of Google, you can
buy shares of BYU for zero enterprise
value. It's a 30 billion market cap, 30
billion in cash on the books. Um, and
from a global perspective, I don't know
why if this is 30K, why you'd want to
deploy Whimos, which people say are over
150K partially due to the to the MIM
solid state LAR advantage that China
has, which we've talked about
previously. So yeah, I think rest of
world is a really interesting thing to
think about, you know, when you compare
the two countries because I don't think
that I I person and I I don't have a ton
of data on this, but I I personally
don't think all the other countries in
the world share the same level of
hawkishness that at least part of the
members of our national government have.
And so I don't think they're going to be
as afraid of their technologies.
>> Let's think about this in the context of
you know uh uh uh what you seen if you
were giving advice to Trump uh on export
controls for example Bill um you know
whether it's on you know AI chips or
other things um you know would you be uh
you know what would your advice be?
Well, I mean, I think you hit on some of
it around the red tape. And, you know,
there's a couple different things in
certain industries where we're really
behind. I would be very open-minded to
JVS coming towards us. You know, for the
past 50 years, you know, European car
manufacturers, US car manufacturers,
they opened facilities in China. Some of
them were forced to be 49% owned, 51%
owned. I'd be very open to that kind of
thing. Um there was some positive news
out this past week um following Trump's
engagement with Korea around nuclear
which we have talked about before. Korea
can build a nuclear plant for 1/4 the
price that we can. Why don't you invite
them to come help us build a few in the
US and see what we can learn? And I
wonder if we should allow Ford. There's
going to be there are so many EV
companies. I didn't even mention, you
know, NEO and Ziker and some of these
other thing. They're all innovating in
different ways, but some of those are
going to have financial trouble. NEO's
public. You can see that that the
stock's not doing all that well, but
would we let a Ford or a GM buy one of
those companies, right? Maybe we should.
I don't know if the China government
would let them. Would we let one of
those companies open a JV with Ford or
GM in the US? I think we should if we'd
learned from it. You could say the same
thing about solar um or any of these
technologies where they have a lead,
solar, nuclear. So, I would be
open-minded to those types of things. Um
I would be really big on trying to get
regulation out of the way and
recognizing that that an autocratic
country that has specific goals can move
so much faster um in any industry than
you ever could in the US. um because
we've created so many people whose jobs
it are to block things. Um and we're
seeing I think we're seeing that type of
behavior in certain states which is why
TSMC's in Arizona, which is why Tesla's
in Texas. I would give Governor Shapiro
a lot of credit um for reopening Three
Mile Island and what he did with I95.
like like all those things are signs of
recognizing that we've built mud, you
know, in in our system um that prevents
building and how do you how do you get
how do you start to remove that and move
in the opposite direction
>> specifically uh you know thinking about
the tariff? So, you know, I think that
the president uh tweeted yesterday
morning if you know, if we don't get I
it it was appearing that we're on a
glide path and making a lot of progress
with China, we may very well be. I think
he tweeted yesterday morning that if we
don't get rare earth magnets from China,
he could raise the tariff rate to 200%.
There was some talk that he was going to
visit China in the first week of
September. So, that's, you know, right
around the corner. Um, I said on a
couple pods ago, I thought that, you
know, the way to understand uh this
president is that he's a self-described
deal junkie. He's a pragmatist. He's not
an ideologue. It seems to me that when
he's talking with Jensen Wang and
others, he falls in that kind of
pragmatic centrist category. Um, he
certainly wants to rebuild stuff in the
United States, but at the same time, it
appears to me he wants to get a big big
deal done on China. Where do you come
down? Again, if you were adviser on the
tariff side of things, Bill, um do you
think he's going to get a big deal done
with China? Do you think that's the
right thing uh to do? And how do you
think that influences uh some of the
building that you're talking about?
Okay, th this is I I have zero insight
like I didn't I I didn't I didn't meet
with anyone in the in the CCP or the
government so I have no idea what what
their mindset I this is pure speculation
on my my point my part. Um, you already
brought up the fact that that we're a
much smaller percentage of their exports
than people realize and people think
about. And as a result, you know, I
think that they're going to be China is
going to be far more um biased by what
they view as as fair and and face saving
than they are necessarily like numeric.
And so I think if we if someone were to
approach them in a pragmatic way, I
think a pragmatic deal could easily get
done. I you know, if they are engineers,
as Dan Wang said, I it's not like, you
know, they they wouldn't accept a
pragmatic outcome. I think they would,
but if we um if we're intent on being
derogatory
in our language and and by the way,
that's the thing that I just really
don't understand um that you see in
Washington, you see it on that select
committee of the CCP and you see it from
some of the the the people in Silicon
Valley. I just don't understand the
value of being uh belligerent and but
but penny people clearly are. I mean,
they have four times the number of
citizens on this earth than we do. And
um none everybody's, you know, country
of birth is something that happens to
them outside of their control. So I I
just don't know why vilifying uh a
billion people is a good idea. Um so I
think it's possible. I think there's a I
think they would do a deal. Um, and I
just don't know if uh if we get caught
up in a silly um tit fortat verbal war
what the benefit of that is and anything
like that. And this is one of the points
Sachs makes um Jeffrey Sachs not David
you you you might provoke World War II.
So what what do you what do you what's
how do you put that into your MPV
calculation? Is it fair to say that, you
know, I think if you look at tariffs,
um, heading into this year, they've
basically doubled on China, but if we
put tariffs on, you know, particular
industries in order to incent, uh,
building and industries in the United
States, imagine it was a deal a bit like
Japan, Bill, where we also, you know,
cut a deal with the Chinese that they
had a trillion dollars of investment the
way we have with other companies that go
into to the US into some of these uh you
know industries and that we perhaps get
some reciprocity and reduction of
barriers to some Chinese goods into into
China where how would you handicap that?
Did you get any sense um uh or or or you
know do you get any sense from the uh
the stuff you read in the United States
as to the the probability of that? I
think it's one of the biggest influences
as we look at growth in the back half of
this year, as we look at market
sentiment in the back half of this year.
Just curious where you stand on that.
>> Ironically, one of the things that I
mean, like I said, I met with I met with
companies and founders and and and
a few academicians, but I did I and some
journalists, but I didn't meet with with
the government. But in general, there's
just not any hostility from their side,
from that group of people that I met
with. In fact, most of those um most of
those people look up to the US founders
that have done great things, the Jobs
and the Elons, and most of them aspire
to compete globally the same way a
founder in the US would like. And so
they would like to see all this um
rhetoric die down and they would like to
have the opportunity to come to the US
market. They'd like the opportunity to
compete in Europe and South America.
many are Xiai and BYD already are and so
I think like I said I think there's a
pragmatic deal to do um to the extent
and and if if that um led to the types
of programs that I just talked about
this kind of JV thing where there's a
market they're a leader in and we you
know have that company come to the US
and help us understand um how to compete
in some of these technologies and get to
lower price points I think that'd be
fantastic. Do you feel like over the
last 20 years, who do you think's gotten
the best out of the relationship, Bill?
>> You know, I haven't read this uh Apple
China book. Um it's it a lot of people
have been talking about it and I and I
aim to. Um it it
I think the problem with looking at it
that way is you know you and I have
talked about this finite versus infinite
game is you know where are we in the
time of the planet and what do you think
the planet's going to look like you know
15 20 30 years from now I mean I think
it'd be very easy to say you know using
your framing to say the US took
advantage of Europe post World War II
and a lot of the manufacturing that
existed prior to World War II shifted to
America. Um, and so you could then with
that same frame say, yeah, China, you
know, grew on the back of America and
and and you know, from from that time,
but I kind of look at it another way,
which is there have been different
periods where these different countries
have industrialized. You know, we were a
huge beneficiary post World War II
because most of Asia and Europe had been
blown up and there was no production
capability whatsoever. And a lot of the
kind of glory day mindset that we have
about what life and generational change
should be like in the US come from that
time. Um, which is a bit unfair I think
from a global perspective. But there's a
ton of hardworking people over there.
you know, Deng Xiaoping brought
capitalism underneath the uh the Chinese
government and led to the biggest, you
know, um
increase in standard of living of any,
it's like 500 million people came out of
poverty as a result of that. And you
know, when people say, "Oh, we should
have never let the jobs go over there."
I I don't think they really want to say,
"Well, we shouldn't have let 500 million
people out of poverty." uh you know it's
the same people that that uh want to
talk about aid in Africa and whatnot. So
a lot of people benefited in China. Um
but they're also hardworking people and
and and we we talk a lot about
meritocracies, right? And some of the
same people that talk about
meritocracies are anti-China. And so
that that's a hard thing to square
because if someone's willing to work
twice as hard, you know, as you and you
know, willing to study harder and and
all that kind of stuff, are they do they
not deserve a chance at a life like you
have? I think the bigger complaint is
that um we were naive in our trade
policy and therefore we allowed huge
advantages to flow to other areas and
you know by the way as Dan says in his
book at the same time we were actually
moving to more of a regulatory state in
the United States. So you know like our
companies were getting less competitive
at the same time we were helping their
companies get more competitive and there
was a lot of collateral damage in the
United States during that period of time
and I think right now people are saying
okay we're moving into this age of AI
but we have to get back to driving
reform in the United States that levels
that playing field a bit. Um and so you
know you can't you can't undo the past.
Um but I do think there's a recognition
that um you know we need to do the
things in order to incentivize US
industry to compete more effectively in
a lot of these different categories. Um
I think it is going I think it is going
to be tricky though. You know, if you
say, you know, you've got a hundred
competitors in the EV industry in China,
they're all willing to work on razor
thin margins and they're willing to sell
cars into Europe at $20,000 or $25,000.
Today, as Farley said, there is not a US
manufacturer sons perhaps Tesla that
comes anywhere close to being able to
compete in that way on a global basis.
>> Correct. One thing I've been studying a
bit is I I do think that the Chinese
government's more has more scrutinous of
monopolies. You know, I don't think that
they I think they would consider it a
negative if there were seven companies
worth $3 trillion or whatever. Like I
don't think they care about market cap.
I think they care more about employment
and global competitiveness, which would
cause you to support low margin
companies. Um, and and you know, they
they get to choose to make that choice.
I'm not judging it, but it would result
in this outcome. You know, there's in
addition to the Farley quote, the
Mercedes CEO said, "We need a reality
check." Um, when he was talking about
Chinese EVs and then Stalantis, I guess
is the new name, Stalantis,
>> who who rolled up a bunch of other car
companies. They said Chinese EVs are
quote possibly the biggest risk facing
his car maker and Tesla. Um and uh he
criticized this is Carlos Tvarez. He
publicly criticized EU tariffs on
Chinese electric vehicles calling them a
major trap for automakers. And this is
this is you know you talk about what
policy would fix things. I'll tell you
what policy will make things worse. you
know, you start protecting US industries
by putting export tariffs on the most
competitive products around the world,
which I talked about earlier. Now, your
consumers don't have access to those
price points. And so, you're buying
inferior goods at inflated prices, and
that's going to lead to inflation and
prosperity and standard of living living
levels dropping in the US. So, there's a
lot of variables. I I would say that's
generally true. I think if there's a
moment, you know, if there was a
national strategy to improve
competitiveness in an industry that had
been, you know, um, uh, uh, let's just
say had an unfair, uh, playing field for
a period of time. Like I could see a
national strategy, for example, we
talked about pharmaceutical
manufacturing, we talked about chip
manufacturing, we talked about rare
earths, where you would say, okay, we're
going to actually impose a tariff
because these other goods are flooding
and it deprivives us of the ability to
build our own domestic industry. But I
think we have to be very careful when
you do that, Bill. To your point, we
know that unfettered competition will
lead to uh, you know, is going to lead
to much better products, much lower
prices. And when you start protecting
these industries, what I worry about is
you protect the regulatory grift and the
the the the overly lawyering that Dan
talks about in his book, right? We got
to face up to this fact that we have to
reform some of these uh, you know, basic
things in the United States. And that's
why you see companies like Tesla moving
to Texas where those reforms are moving
forward. And I think you know I think we
are making progress on that. But I you
know I think you there is a rationale
uh for those critical national
industries. But I generally agree with
you that if we move to high levels of
protection because we simply can't
compete because it takes you know us uh
you know 10 people uh in an auto plant
to do what they do with one person in an
auto plant. I think that's
unsustainable.
>> You and I think we need to be careful
with the rhetoric we throw around. So So
I'll give you an example. So um if you
read what comes out of the biggest
talks, they say, "Well, everyone in
China just steals things and the
government subsidizes everything." So
when I I brought that up with I brought
up the subsidization with Stella Lee at
BYD and she said she said, "If I'm
getting all this government subsidy
money, can you please find it and show
it to me? We're we're a public company.
come show me the money I'm getting from
the government. She's just say I'm
getting nothing. And um and and then you
know, you look at the US like we give
companies subsidies all the time to
build factories. We've had EV credits
for the past 10 years both at a state
and a federal level. Um Intel's getting
money from the US government. like I
don't understand where we're say like
like it's very unclear to me like what
we're pointing at and accusing and why
it doesn't isn't the same thing here.
And then lastly, you know, Elon's
published all the Tesla patents. Okay.
So, there's free IP for Ford and GM. And
I would ask you with that free IP, if we
gave Ford and GM subsidies, do you think
they'd immediately be competitive with
China?
>> No, sir. Okay. And if I ask a hundred
smart investors that question, what
would they say?
>> I think they would agree with me.
>> Yeah. So, so, so, so the thing we're
accusing them of being the reason
they're succeeding, if you flipped and
gave that to the US companies, none of
us have confidence that would work. So,
that's what I'm saying. You just got to
try and get as much information as you
can, learn as much as you can. Um, so
that you I I just want people to have a
pragmatic view and an accurate view as
they make decisions. I I did a deep dive
on on your favorite product chat GBT
$300 version deep research and on the 24
members of the select committee for the
CCP and I think all but four have never
been to China.
>> Um, right. And the ones that went it was
seven years ago. I'd just encourage them
to go visit if they're going to sit
there and have um such strong opinions.
It'd be good if they were educated. I
wouldn't want if you were putting
together a committee inside of your
corporation um that's going to be in
charge of something, wouldn't you want
the most educated people on that
committee?
>> I can already hear the criticism that
Oh, yeah. Um, you know, you know, of
course people would say, well, we don't
expect the CEO of BYD to tell you the
truth necessarily about government
subsidies or or or things like this. Um,
but here's the one thing I want to get
across in, you know, kind of this
pragmatist camp. We do have to be
self-reflective,
right? I mean, if we have this if we
have this view that the only reason
China's competitive or winning is
because they're they're stealing or
they're subsidized. I think what that
view does is it allows us to delude
ourselves into believing we don't need
to get better ourselves.
>> Yeah. Like it's like if you're playing a
competition and you know your your kids
out there playing in a football game or
a swimming race and they lose the race
and they come back to you and they say
well the only reason that person won was
you know they cheated. You know like
your advice I think is no you've got to
get better yourself. We've got to get
better. How can we get better? And I
think that's why cultivating this
balanced and realistic view of China,
what's actually happening on the ground,
how hard right, folks are working, what
the level of innovation is, the fact
that the United States is is is a
diminishing part of their trade, of
their GDP, etc. I think that should
cause us to look a little bit inward
about how the hell do we accelerate? How
do we build more? How do we invest more?
How do we, you know, get more globally
competitive? Why does it cost us four to
five times to build a fision reactor in
this country? Why are we building no
nuclear reactors in this country? And so
the good news is this. I feel like
there's a lot of momentum under this
administration that was building before
this administration around investing in
America, getting more globally
competitive, right? A lot of people want
to build things here again, you know,
and and you got you have somebody like
Jensen Huang who says both can be true.
We need to sell H20s and B30s into
China. We need to stay relevant in their
ecosystem, but at the same time, we need
to build plants in Arizona. We need to
rehabilitate and invest aggressively in
our own domestic chip program. Those
things can be simultaneously true. Um,
and it it it's interesting that all of
those CEOs who spend the most time
competing in China, you know, they all
fall in that pragmatist realist camp. Y
>> um you know in the center about you know
the United States needs to get serious
about the work that it needs to do if it
wants to remain globally competitive.
>> With that said, Bill, can we shift for a
second? I want to I want to, you know,
look at this through the lens of kind of
just what's going on in AI, you know, um
I know you spent a bunch of time over
there looking at the key players on the
model side, on the, you know, thinking
about the chip side, etc. Um so maybe
just round out that other conversation
and then shift there.
>> Yeah. So so um one thing one thing to
note that um that isn't in the Dan Wing
book but I I think that we can infer
from it the government every 5 years
publishes this five-year plan. Um the
last one was the 14th and I think the
next one will be coming out soon. I
would encourage everyone to read that
because that's where they tell the
provinces what's important to work on
and that historically has led to these
areas where they're investing heavily
and they might make a mistake in what
they say to focus on but when they've
gotten it right it's led to a lot of
global competitiveness. So I would watch
that but in the in the last one in the
14th they literally talked about open
source. Um, and so, you know, I I'll put
a link in I found a document that covers
all the history of Chinese open source,
but it goes back 20 years. This isn't an
overnight thing. Um, and our government
recently said they were pro open source
in this new AI executive order, but but
but this was kind of pushed out to the
provinces. And so, two two things I
would say about the AI market there.
First of all, no one's particularly
concerned about there being a a
monopolist because there's so many open
models. So there's in general, I think
from the entrepreneurs perspective, um a
more relaxed, you know, opinion because
they can work on products and they can
take in all these different models. I
think I think Deep Seek has the most
kind of intellectual brand because of
how that arrived and and and almost the
the the national pride that came along
with it. Um Quinn um is a really
important player mainly because Alibaba
leads in the cloud market over there.
They're about as you you may you and
your team may know more of these stats
than me Brad but I think they're like a
70% player in the cloud market and so
that just gives them a natural place to
deliver models from that makes them
important and then on the consumer side
you know bite dance seems to be the
company to watch on anything consumer
and they already have an app if someone
said whose app is closest to open ais in
China it's already an app from bite
dance um that's out there people on the
watch list. People are very curious if
10 cent's going to do something. You
know, obviously they we chat still
extremely um important in China and so
that's a great asset if they were to
bring something but they haven't been
particularly aggressive and then Xiaomi
because of Le June everybody wonders
what he might do and you know owning the
phone and that big a market share might
give you some advantages and we've
talked about that with the US players.
So that's kind of that's what I would
say is the state of affairs over there
on when it comes to AI
>> on the model layer. Um is do you think
there's an acknowledgment or a belief uh
that they're basically they have the
tools they have the chips you know with
Huawei etc to be competitive? Like is
there a sense in China that you know
Quen Code is going to be competitive
with Claude Code? Um, you know, we know
they're all open source. Do you think
there is a sense that they all stay at
the frontier?
>> Like I had that sense before I went just
because of the number of competitive
open source models and the way they can
trade train each other. Did you just
have a much more natural environment to
have this kind of hyper competition that
we talked about in EVs or solar? Like
having that many open source providers
gives you that I would say even maybe
more because of the way the models can
help one another. At least in the EV
case like you can't take someone else's
EV and make yours better, but here you
can.
>> Can we talk about that? Ju just open for
a second. Let me double click on this.
you know, obviously we saw o open AAI
open source, you know, uh a model a few
weeks back. Now we have comments this
week out of Elon. Uh they're they're
getting back to more aggressively open
sourcing. Um, you've obviously got Meta
already, uh, uh, you know, with Llama
out there on the open source front. And
I saw you had a tweet yesterday, maybe,
Bill, just on you were surprised that
Google had not taken a more aggressive
position with respect to open sourcing
Gemini. Um, do you think they will? Why
do you think they haven't? And why do
you think it would be the right thing
for them to do that?
>> Well, I I had some replies to that tweet
to get into this, but this goes back to
where you started the podcast. I don't
think public companies understand or I
don't think they've internalized
um and and really come to terms with the
fact that the private markets are
willing to bet so aggressively on these
new players and I you know we're talking
about AI today but this could be true of
any new disruption in the future. When
when I was going through the the Uber
lift wars and you know we'd be in board
meetings and look at these burn rates
and all this money we're spending. You
talk about whether or not to raise
another round and certainly thought
about doing what Sam did and trying to
talk capital out of the market which
never seems to work. Um, but you get
frustrated with that game and you want
to, you know, but but you're dealing
with business decisions that you would
never see in another industry. And so
getting back to the question you asked,
you know, I just don't know like if
everything's at stake for Google, should
they be willing to lose five or 10
billion dollars? Because the startup
that's attacking their space is willing
to lose that amount of money. And I
think it's it's it's an ironic situation
we're in where the private markets and
the startups are willing to be more
aggressive perhaps and more risk-seeking
than the public incumbents are. And I
think, you know,
our friend Rich Barton took a lot of
heat at Zillow when he when he chased
Open Door, but he was faced with a
situation where a private company was
claiming it was going to out innovate
him and disrupt his game and and some of
Wall Street had come to believe that.
And so he engaged and he played that
game on the field. Now, that eventually
turned out to not be true. Um and and
maybe if he hadn't engaged competitively
with Open Door, maybe they wouldn't have
have kind of tripped and fallen. But but
it was probably the right thing to do.
And I don't think a lot of public
companies think that way. Now Google
historically when it came to AWS, open
sourced Kubernetes and went after them.
When it came to Apple, they open sourced
Android. And certainly some of their
their lower models are uh open sourced
and competitive on open router, but
maybe they should be more aggressive
even still because of what's at stake.
That was that was my point.
>> Okay, shifting back real quick and you
know we'll we'll round up here on China.
Um you know the VC market in China, we
just rewind the clock. You know, not
that long ago, Bill. Um and you know
there was a lot of US enthusiasm. There
were a lot of US firms investing
directly in China. Um right from SEOA to
GGV. A lot of those firms either shut
down or spun off their operations uh you
know in China. Benchmark has taken a lot
of you know heat for doing an investment
manis that you know I've I I've read
benchmark explained really isn't even
you know based in China. what do you
see, you know, when you were there, do
you see a lot of US investors actively
investing on the venture side in China?
And then what is the Chinese venture
ecosystem look like?
>> So, a couple different things. So, first
of all, um there's a real lack of
westerners. For all my trips, this was
the the fewest westerners that I've ever
seen. And the high-end hotels and the
high-end restaurants were fairly empty.
Um and I think that it just has to do
with the thawing of the relationship. um
that's caused less travel from
Westerners. Um the VC market um is in a
bit of a lull because when when these
policies all changed and when you know
the Jack Maw thing happened, when DD got
pulled back from the US markets, when
the for-profit education companies got
taken out and when uh you know WeChat
went I mean 10-centent went flat for a
couple years because of games reforms.
All those things um took a lot of air
out of the system and caused a lot of
people to reconsider. And then you also
had and I don't even know if this was
more led by the US government or the
China government. You had the splitting
of the venture capital firms. Sequoia
split in half. GGV split in half and and
so there are much fewer western dollars
available to invest in China. And so you
know there are a few firms that have
stayed. you know, Neil Shin at Hong Sean
had raised a ton of money right before
all this happened. He's very active, has
a huge staff of people. um Anna Fang and
and Zen Fund which is a a angel group
are very active and IDG is highly
present and has been active but that's
only three firms you know and compared
to where things were six years ago when
every one of our um competitors in the
venture industry were making an annual
trip it's it's kind of night and day um
and then there's not that many um R&B
dollars available to the venture market.
A lot of the you don't have the
foundations in and university endowments
that you do here and the billionaires um
that have made wealth typically are
looking to diversify offshore and so you
just don't have a lot of R&B dollars
seeking a home and now you have the
provinces entering the investment space
which is an uncomfortable reality for
some of the VCs. They're ask I hear
they're asking for terms that you and I
would consider um non-starters,
you know. Um and so that's it's all a
little bit messy. Um it's it's funny
because it's simultaneously with some of
these markets, EVs, uh autonomous, uh
robotics where they're where the country
is doing extremely well. So, I found
those things off a little bit and it's
very everyone's very aware that if the
government decides
um your company is doing something
that's not in the best interest of the
uh citizenry that that's going to get
corrected. And so there's a phrase, I
don't know if it was in Dan's book or I
read somewhere else called don't be the
tallest tree.
>> That's a problem for you.
>> Yeah, exactly.
Um yeah is in in that regard do you
think you know that's what I was I was
wondering you know there seems to be a
ton of entrepreneurial activity despite
the fact that you know VCs have
retreated that you have companies that
are not going public and have been shut
down you have entrepreneurs that have
gone missing it doesn't really seem to
have diminished you you know the
activity around uh you know around AI
high as we were talking about clearly
>> or or startups or entrepreneurism and
and in fact a lot of the locals heavily
dispute that Financial Times graph that
was going around about the number of
startups. They said it just mismeasured
the whole thing and so no I I don't
sense that there's any lack of
enthusiasm from entrepreneurs and towns
like Shenzhen um where where DJI and BYD
and Huawei are all located. I mean that
town is a new young 20 million people
highly energetic you know town with lots
of stuff happening you know lots of
stuff
>> you said something to me um well before
before we wrapped is there anything else
anything else that we we didn't cover
that you want to you want to hit on
>> there's two there's two things I would
hit on you know you talked about
innovation one thing one thing that that
you notice very quickly as a westerner
is no one takes credit cards. They used
to like the last time I went, but it's
almost 100% uh WeChat Pay and Alip Pay.
And if you can't get those to work on
your phone, you're screwed, man. You
can't pay for anything. Um
>> what's a what's what's the government's
position on crypto?
>> I don't know the answer to that
question. Okay.
>> I don't. But but because they've been
using these apps for so long,
>> um you've started to see incremental
innovation around that. So, at most
restaurants you go to, not the very
high-end ones, there's a QR code on your
table. That QR code not only represents
the restaurant, but it represents the
table. And you can order from that, you
can pay from that. Like, like, so if you
are done eating and want to pay and
leave, you just scan and pay and go. You
walk right out. And um, you know, we
we're far away from that in the US, that
amount of of automation around payment.
Um, and it's just interesting. and and
that goes from, you know, the high-end
hotel and restaurant will take WeChat
pay and the street vendor will take it,
right? It's it's it's universal. So,
that's one thing. The the other thing
that I would just mention, um, very
recently, China announced something
called the K visa. And one of the um one
of the things that's happened recently
because of I'd say an increased um
agitation between the two countries is
there have been a number of very recent
policies in America that are impacting
skilled immigration especially at the
university level. And I did hear stories
over there of groups of 50 or 100 PhD
students who had been admitted into a
university and were now being told they
can't attend. And you and I and everyone
have talked about skilled immigration
and how that's been kept flat in the US.
Um and now you know at least with regard
to China, we're starting to put up
blockers. And on top of that, you've
seen these other charts where like 50%
of the AI researchers in America are
Chinese. And so that that's something
that's super interesting to watch. And
this K visa thing, which they've never
done before, says if you are studying um
technology, you know, I don't know the
exact rules, you don't even have to have
a job. So this isn't like a in the US
you need a you're welcome to come.
They're going to give you a visa. So,
China's basically inviting everyone to
come to their university systems from
around the globe. I don't know how
successful they'll be. I don't know if
Europeans will go there. Um, but it's an
interesting
thing to see.
>> Again, it's just a reminder to me like I
I continue to think that uh the US is in
an incredible position on a global
basis, an incredible position visa v
China, but decisions matter. And, you
know, we talked about stapling a green
card to every, you know, uh, every
diploma as, uh, you know, the the
president did as part of the the the the
presidential race. Um, and certainly I
think there's ample opportunity, uh, for
upside to accelerate, to attract, to
build in the US. And I hope that one of
the takeaways of this conversation, the
many conversations we ought to have, and
it's why I think being overly dogmatic
leads us astray, is we got to reflect on
the things that we can be doing better
to run a faster race ourselves, right?
And I've heard you say this before, you
know, the old quote from the Godfather,
never hate your enemy enemies. You know,
it clouds it affects your judgment. Yep.
And I think there's a lot of that going
on in Silicon Valley and other places
that um you know we're going to be a lot
better off if we're very pragmatic about
uh there's no slowing down in China.
They're going to be there in AI. They're
going to build chips at Huawei. They're
going to build models at Deepseek. And
the the way to beat them is not to you
you know try to cut them off at the
knees. We don't need to make it easy on
them. But the United States needs to
accelerate our race. And I think by if
if we focus too much on how do we slow
down China, we take the eye off the ball
on how to accelerate our own race. So
it's fun spending one of these just
digging deep on a on a particular topic.
It sounds like an incredible trip.
>> Yeah. And and I would just echo what you
said like like on especially just on
learning like my my main point to anyone
that's interested in this topic would be
just make sure you have the exact right
information as you then go to make
decisions especially around policy. Um
and you know talk read read what these
uh global
car CEOs are telling you. They've been
over there. They're seeing it with their
own eyes. they they don't they don't
have a reason to be as candid as they're
being necessarily, but they are. Um, and
then read Dan Wang's book. I think it's
fabulous. Like Tyler Cowan said it might
be one it might be the best book of the
year. It's very well written and and a
joy to read and I would uh encourage
everyone to go pick it up. It's called
Breakneck. I think it's out now today.
No, you literally can go on chat GBT and
just ask it, you know, uh what your
favorite CEO, you know, what's Jensen
Wang think about, uh the level of
competition in China, what's Tim Cook
think, what's Elon Musk think. Um the
reality is the people who spend the most
chi time on the ground in China have the
most respect for, you know, the innate
uh you know, capabilities and ongoing
competition that we're going to see with
China. And you know and and I thought
that Dan had a really balanced view at
the end which is you know we shouldn't
go out of our way to make it really easy
on China but at the same time we got to
engage. We got to be you know pragmatic.
We can't stick our head in the sand and
we have to know that we got to reform
ourselves. We got to run a faster race
ourselves. Bill, it's great seeing you.
I'm glad we're kind of getting back in
the swing of things and uh look forward
to uh continuing the conversation.
[Music]
As a reminder to everybody, just our
opinions, not investment advice.